docs/design.md, before:

# 📘 Event Store in Go – Requirements Document

## ✅ Overview

This project implements a modular, pluggable **Event Store** in **Go**, following:

- Clean Architecture
- CQRS (Command Query Responsibility Segregation)
- Event Sourcing
- Domain-Driven Design (DDD)
- Dependency Injection
- Repository Pattern

It exposes a RESTful API for managing/querying events, supports transient subscriptions, and allows runtime configuration of multiple topics, each with its own persistent storage.

---

## 🧱 Modules

### 1. `api` – REST API Gateway

**Responsibilities:**
- Expose REST endpoints for data and control planes
- Route commands/queries to the `eventstore`
- Manage transient subscriber callbacks

**Endpoints:**

**Control Plane:**
- `POST /topics` – Create topic
- `GET /health` – Health check
- `GET /topics` – List all topics

**Data Plane:**
- `POST /topics/{topic}/events` – Publish event
- `GET /topics/{topic}/events?from=123` – Query events
- `POST /topics/{topic}/subscribe?from=123` – Register callback (transient)

---

### 2. `eventstore` – Core CQRS Engine

**Responsibilities:**
- Handle all command and query operations
- Persist and retrieve events using runtime-configured adapters
- Broadcast events to projections and transient subscribers

**Submodules:**
- `commands/`
- `queries/`
- `topics/`
- `projections/`
- `subscribers/`

---

### 3. `adapters/`

**Submodules:**

- `memory/`: Volatile, in-memory event storage
- `fs/`: File system-based storage using JSON files
- `blob/`: Persists events as JSON to Azure Blob Storage
- `postgres/`: Stores events in PostgreSQL tables

---

## 🔁 Topic Configuration

Each topic is registered with a unique configuration:

```json
{
  "name": "orders",
  "adapter": "postgres",
  "connection": "postgres://user:pass@localhost/db",
  "schema": "public",
  "table": "order_events"
}
```

For the file system adapter, the configuration looks like:

```json
{
  "name": "users",
  "adapter": "fs",
  "connection": "/data/eventstore",
  "options": {
    "createDirIfNotExist": "true"
  }
}
```

---

## 🔄 CQRS Design

### Command Side
- Publishes events to configured adapter
- Broadcasts to projections and callbacks

### Query Side
- Powered by projections (event handlers)
- Read models optimized for querying

### Projections
- Background workers
- Keep query-side models up-to-date

---

## ⚙️ Technologies & Tools

| Component         | Technology         |
|------------------|--------------------|
| Language          | Go                 |
| Database          | PostgreSQL         |
| Cloud Storage     | Azure Blob Storage |
| Local Storage     | File System (JSON) |
| REST Framework    | chi / net/http     |
| Containerization  | Docker, Compose    |
| Testing           | `testing`, `httptest`, `dockertest` |

---

## 🧩 Design Patterns

- CQRS
- Event Sourcing
- DDD
- Repository Pattern
- Dependency Injection

---

## 📦 Project Directory Structure

```
/
├── src/                   # Source code
│   ├── cmd/               # Entrypoints
│   │   ├── api/           # Starts REST API server
│   │   └── replay/        # Runs projection rebuilds
│   │
│   └── internal/          # Internal packages
│       ├── api/           # HTTP handlers
│       ├── eventstore/    # CQRS core engine
│       │   ├── commands/
│       │   ├── queries/
│       │   ├── topics/
│       │   ├── projections/
│       │   └── subscribers/
│       ├── adapters/      # Storage adapters
│       │   ├── memory/
│       │   ├── fs/
│       │   ├── blob/
│       │   └── postgres/
│       └── port/          # Interfaces (ports)
│           ├── inbound/
│           └── outbound/
│
├── test/                  # Integration tests
│
├── infra/                 # Infrastructure
│   ├── workstation/       # Docker workstation setup
│   └── docker/            # Docker configuration
│
└── go.mod
```

Note that only integration tests are placed in the `test` directory. Unit tests are placed in the directory of the file that is under test.

---

## 🖼️ ASCII Architecture Diagram

```
                    +----------------+
                    |    REST API    |
                    |     (chi)      |
                    +----------------+
                             |
        +--------------------+-------------------+
        |                                        |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
| Command Side  |                       |   Query Side    |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
        |                                        |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
|  Adapters      |     <-- CQRS -->     |  Projections     |
| (memory/fs/    |                       |  (event handlers)|
|   blob/postgres)|                       +-----------------+
+---------------+
        |
+-------------------------+
| Persistent Event Storage|
+-------------------------+
```

---

## ✅ Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests:
- Command and query handlers
- Topic and event validation
- Adapter mocks

### Integration Tests:
- Full API tests
- Blob and PostgreSQL storage tests
- Callback delivery

---

## 🚦 Startup Behavior

1. Load topic configurations
2. Initialize persistence adapters
3. Start projection processors
4. Launch HTTP API (chi)

---

Let me know if you'd like this scaffolded into code or deployed with a local Docker Compose setup!

Commit message:

feature: define the subscriber interface

docs/design.md, after:

# 📘 Event Store in Go – Requirements Document

## ✅ Overview

This project implements a modular, pluggable **Event Store** in **Go**, following:

- Clean Architecture
- CQRS (Command Query Responsibility Segregation)
- Event Sourcing
- Domain-Driven Design (DDD)
- Dependency Injection
- Repository Pattern

It exposes a RESTful API for managing/querying events, supports transient subscriptions, and allows runtime configuration of multiple topics, each with its own persistent storage.

---

## 🧱 Modules

### 1. `api` – REST API Gateway

**Responsibilities:**
- Expose REST endpoints for data and control planes
- Route commands/queries to the `eventstore`
- Manage transient subscriber callbacks

**Endpoints:**

**Control Plane:**
- `POST /topics` – Create topic
- `GET /health` – Health check
- `GET /topics` – List all topics

**Data Plane:**
- `POST /topics/{topic}/events` – Publish event
- `GET /topics/{topic}/events?from=123` – Query events
- `POST /topics/{topic}/subscribe?from=123` – Register callback (transient)

---

### 2. `eventstore` – Core CQRS Engine

**Responsibilities:**
- Handle all command and query operations
- Persist and retrieve events using runtime-configured adapters
- Broadcast events to projections and transient subscribers

**Submodules:**
- `commands/`
- `queries/`
- `topics/`
- `projections/`
- `subscribers/`

---

### 3. `adapters/`

**Submodules:**

- `memory/`: Volatile, in-memory event storage
- `fs/`: File system-based storage using JSON files
- `blob/`: Persists events as JSON to Azure Blob Storage
- `postgres/`: Stores events in PostgreSQL tables

---

## 🔁 Topic Configuration

Each topic is registered with a unique configuration:

```json
{
  "name": "orders",
  "adapter": "postgres",
  "connection": "postgres://user:pass@localhost/db",
  "schema": "public",
  "table": "order_events"
}
```

For the file system adapter, the configuration looks like:

```json
{
  "name": "users",
  "adapter": "fs",
  "connection": "/data/eventstore",
  "options": {
    "createDirIfNotExist": "true"
  }
}
```

---

## 🔄 CQRS Design

### Command Side
- Publishes events to configured adapter
- Broadcasts to projections and callbacks
- The callbacks are called against transient subscribers.  Each subscribers register an interesting in one or more topics.  This registration is done via the `POST /topics/{topic}/subscribe` endpoint with the subscriber providing a callback function - POST.  When an event is published to a topic, the eventstore will broadcast the event to all transient subscribers that are interested in the topic.  This will use native Go channels to deliver the event to the subscriber.  The subscriber register is held in memory and is keyed by the subscriber.  This is managed in EventStore.

### Query Side
- Powered by projections (event handlers)
- Read models optimized for querying

### Projections
- Background workers
- Keep query-side models up-to-date

---

## ⚙️ Technologies & Tools

| Component         | Technology         |
|------------------|--------------------|
| Language          | Go                 |
| Database          | PostgreSQL         |
| Cloud Storage     | Azure Blob Storage |
| Local Storage     | File System (JSON) |
| REST Framework    | chi / net/http     |
| Containerization  | Docker, Compose    |
| Testing           | `testing`, `httptest`, `dockertest` |

---

## 🧩 Design Patterns

- CQRS
- Event Sourcing
- DDD
- Repository Pattern
- Dependency Injection

---

## 📦 Project Directory Structure

```
/
├── src/                   # Source code
│   ├── cmd/               # Entrypoints
│   │   ├── api/           # Starts REST API server
│   │   └── replay/        # Runs projection rebuilds
│   │
│   └── internal/          # Internal packages
│       ├── api/           # HTTP handlers
│       ├── eventstore/    # CQRS core engine
│       │   ├── commands/
│       │   ├── queries/
│       │   ├── topics/
│       │   ├── projections/
│       │   └── subscribers/
│       ├── adapters/      # Storage adapters
│       │   ├── memory/
│       │   ├── fs/
│       │   ├── blob/
│       │   └── postgres/
│       └── port/          # Interfaces (ports)
│           ├── inbound/
│           └── outbound/
│
├── test/                  # Integration tests
│
├── infra/                 # Infrastructure
│   ├── workstation/       # Docker workstation setup
│   └── docker/            # Docker configuration
│
└── go.mod
```

Note that only integration tests are placed in the `test` directory. Unit tests are placed in the directory of the file that is under test.

---

## 🖼️ ASCII Architecture Diagram

```
                    +----------------+
                    |    REST API    |
                    |     (chi)      |
                    +----------------+
                             |
        +--------------------+-------------------+
        |                                        |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
| Command Side  |                       |   Query Side    |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
        |                                        |
+---------------+                       +-----------------+
|  Adapters      |     <-- CQRS -->     |  Projections     |
| (memory/fs/    |                       |  (event handlers)|
|   blob/postgres)|                       +-----------------+
+---------------+
        |
+-------------------------+
| Persistent Event Storage|
+-------------------------+
```

---

## ✅ Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests:
- Command and query handlers
- Topic and event validation
- Adapter mocks

### Integration Tests:
- Full API tests
- Blob and PostgreSQL storage tests
- Callback delivery

---

## 🚦 Startup Behavior

1. Load topic configurations
2. Initialize persistence adapters
3. Start projection processors
4. Launch HTTP API (chi)

---

Let me know if you'd like this scaffolded into code or deployed with a local Docker Compose setup!
